% Exercises Big Data Course: Visualisation
% Jan Aerts & Toni Verbeiren
% 12/2/2014

# Visualisation

## Preparation

Make sure your follow the Javascript course on [CodeAcademy](http://www.codecademy.com/tracks/javascript).

Take a look at [`paper.js`](http://paperjs.org/) and make sure you get the idea. You could try some examples or even to create a sketch.


## Assignment

1. Take a look at the datasets: where do they come from, what do they represent, how large are they, missing values, etc.
2. When looking at the datasets: what type of data could be interesting to visualize? Why would you visualize this data?
3. (optional) If you are not yet familiar with the Linux terminal, the shell or writing simple javascript code, we advise you to experiment with it: take a look already at the excercise below, and start preparing in advance.


## Excercise

Create the visualization you came up with during the presentation. A template file has been provided in (a subdirectory of) your home directory on the teaching server. It can be found here:

    ~/visualization/simple.js

You can view the webpage that is rendered using this javascript/paperscript program by pointing your browser to the following url:

    http://50.16.33.38:8000/

You should find you name in the list. Clicking it shows you the result of executing the script in `simple.js` mentioned above.

You should be able to get a working script that visualizes _some_ aspect of one of the datasets we provided at the end of the excercise session. Keep it simple, but think about _why_ this is something you want to visualize.


